---
title: "Economic Slack" # max chars = 70
date: 2022-12-15
url: /c2/
aliases: 
    - /t5.html
    - /t4.html
    - /w0.html
    - /w1.html
    - /w2.html
    - /w3.html
    - /w4.html
    - /w5.html
    - /w6.html
    - /w7.html
    - /w8.html
    - /w9.html
    - /w10.html
    - /w11.html
    - /w12.html
    - /w13.html
    - /w14.html
    - /w15.html
    - /w16.html
    - /w17.html
    - /w18.html
    - /w19.html
    - /w20.html
    - /w21.html
    - /w22.html
    - /w23.html
    - /w24.html
    - /w25.html
    - /w26.html
    - /w27.html
    - /w28.html
    - /w29.html
    - /w30.html
    - /w31.html
    - /w32.html
    - /w33.html
    - /w34.html
    - /w35.html
    - /w36.html
    - /w37.html
    - /w38.html
    - /w39.html
    - /w40.html
    - /w41.html
    - /w42.html
    - /w43.html
    - /w44.html
    - /w45.html
    - /w46.html
    - /w47.html
    - /w48.html
    - /w49.html
    - /w50.html
    - /w51.html
    - /w52.html
    - /w53.html
    - /w54.html
    - /w55.html
    - /w56.html
    - /w57.html
    - /w58.html
    - /w59.html
    - /w60.html
    - /w61.html
    - /w62.html
    - /w63.html
    - /w64.html
    - /w65.html
    - /w66.html
    - /w67.html
    - /w68.html
    - /w69.html
    - /w70.html
    - /w71.html
    - /w72.html
    - /w73.html
    - /w74.html
    - /w75.html
    - /w76.html
    - /w77.html
    - /w78.html
    - /w79.html
    - /w80.html
    - /w81.html
    - /w82.html
    - /w83.html
    - /w84.html
    - /w85.html
    - /w86.html
    - /w87.html
    - /w88.html
    - /w89.html
    - /w90.html
    - /w91.html
    - /w92.html
    - /w93.html
    - /w94.html
    - /w95.html
    - /w96.html
    - /w97.html
    - /w98.html
    - /w99.html
    - /w100.html
    - /w101.html
    - /w102.html
    - /w103.html
    - /w104.html
    - /w105.html
    - /w106.html
    - /w107.html
    - /w108.html
    - /w109.html
    - /w110.html
    - /w111.html
    - /w112.html
    - /w113.html
    - /w114.html
    - /w115.html
    - /w116.html
    - /w117.html
    - /w118.html
    - /w119.html
    - /w120.html
    - /w121.html
    - /w122.html
    - /w123.html
    - /w124.html
    - /w125.html
    - /w126.html
    - /w127.html
    - /w128.html
    - /w129.html
    - /w130.html
    - /w131.html
    - /w132.html
tags: ["matching model","economic slack","price rigidity","monetary policy","government spending","sufficient statistics","business cycles","lecture videos"]
author: "Pascal Michaillat"
description: "This course presents a matching model of economic slack, and use it to study business-cycle fluctuations, monetary policy, and fiscal policy." # max chars = 155
summary: "This course presents a matching model of economic slack, and use it to study business-cycle fluctuations, monetary policy, and fiscal policy." # max chars = 290
cover:
    image: "/c2.png"
    alt: "Rationing and frictional unemployment in the United States, 1964–2009"
    relative: false
editPost:
    URL: "https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PL5zEkRHvv2GxHa26QiEdeEybMy0UbdjmW"
    Text: "Youtube playlist"
disableAnchoredHeadings: false

---

---

## Introduction

This course covers research topics related to economic slack, both on the labor market (unemployment) and on the product market (idleness). The course is centered around formal modeling, but it also presents evidence supporting the assumptions introduced in the models.

So what is economic slack? Economic slack describes the amount of productive resources in the economy that are unused. There are many different forms of slack: people who cannot find a job and remain unemployed; machines left idle in a factory; employed workers left idle on the job; hotel rooms, restaurants table, airplane seats that remain vacant; durable goods that cannot be sold and depreciate; perishable goods that cannot be sold and perish.

Economic slack represents a waste of productive resources, and it therefore is something that should be limited. Moreover, in addition to its wastefulness, unemployment generates other, large costs to society. People who are unemployed suffer from lower mental and physical health than employed workers. Even employed people in areas with high unemployment report lower well-being. Accordingly, good economic policy should stabilize economic slack at a desirable level and avoid periods of elevated slack.

The course presents models of economic slack and discusses policies used to tackle slack. The course tries to answer several questions: Why does slack exist? How does it affect economic life? Why does slack vary over time? How are slack fluctuations related to price and wage rigidities? What is the socially optimal amount of slack? How should monetary policy respond to fluctuations in slack over the business cycle? How should fiscal policy respond to fluctuations in slack over the business cycle? What happens to slack and policies at the zero lower bound? Does the effectiveness of policies depend on the prevailing amount of slack?

## Overview of business-cycle models

This section first reviews the Kuhnian model of science. It then uses the Kuhnian perspective to understand how, over the past century, business-cycle macroeconomics evolved from the IS-LM model (inspired by Keynes's *General Theory*) to the general disequilibrium model (with nonclearing markets) to the real business-cycle model (with perfectly competitive markets) and finally to the New Keynesian model (with monopolistically competitive markets).

## Prevalence of slack and matching function

This section documents the presence of slack on the labor market (unemployed workers) and on the product market (idle labor and capital). It also documents that such slack always coexists with vacant jobs and unfulfilled consumption. Then, it introduces the matching function, which is the tool that we will use to model the coexistence of unemployed workers and vacant jobs, and of idle labor and capital and unfulfilled consumption.  The matching function summarizes the complex process through which workers searching for jobs meet firms searching for employees, and firms searching for customers meet consumers searching for sellers.

## Basic model of slack

This section develops the most basic macro model of economic slack. The model is static. It is built around a matching function. Because of the matching function, self-employed workers are not able to sell all their services: there is always some slack. Wealth (in the form of real money balances) enters the utility function. Thanks to this assumption, and although the model is static, the aggregate demand is nondegenerate.

## Model of slack with income and wealth inequality

This section introduces income and wealth inequality in the basic model of slack. It computes the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves, and shows how the model with inequality can be solved. In the model the marginal propensity to spend varies with slack, and the deviation from Say's Law appears clearly.

## Discussion of the solution concept

This section provides additional discussions of the solution concept used in the model of slack, and discusses an interesting special case. It also shows how the model solution is the equilibrium (in the sense from physics not economics) of a dynamical model in which households slowly learn the market tightness.

## Price and wage rigidities

This section argues that prices and wages are not fully flexible but instead somewhat rigid. Fairness seems to be a key reason behind price and wage rigidities. The section then shows how realistic pricing norms can be inserted into the model of slack. It computes comparative statics in response to AD and AS shocks under fixed prices and rigid prices. It contrasts these results to those obtained under bargained prices.

## Model of slack with labor and product markets

This section presents a model with two sectors and two types of slack: a labor market with unemployment and a product market with idleness. Unemployment and idleness interact with each other.  For instance, after an increase in aggregate demand, firms find more customers. This reduces the idle time of firms' employees and thus increases firms' labor demand. This in turn reduces unemployment.


## Dynamic model of slack

This section presents a dynamic version of the model of slack. An advantage of moving to a dynamic environment is that interest rates appear into the model. Indeed, the real interest rate is a key determinant of aggregate demand. By setting a nominal interest rate, the central bank can stabilize the economy. The model is useful to quantify the effect of monetary policy on unemployment, and is therefore useful to quantify how soft the current Fed's landing will be. If the Fed reduces market tightness from 2 to 1, we can expect the unemployment rate to rise from 4% to 5%.

## Social welfare, efficiency, and inefficiency

The model of slack is generally inefficient. Except in a knife-edge case, there is too much or too little slack.  The section therefore develops a sufficient-statistic formula for the efficient amount of slack. The section shows that the US economy is generally inefficient, and especially exceedingly slack in slumps.

## Optimal monetary policy over the business cycle

This section describes optimal monetary policy over the business cycle. Monetary policy influences the aggregate-demand curve, so it can be used to shrink the unemployment gap. In fact, the optimal monetary policy is to adjust interest rates to eliminate the unemployment gap entirely. So the central bank should lower rates in bad times, when unemployment is inefficiently high, and raise rates in good times, when unemployment is inefficiently low. Furthermore, since output and unemployment rate are negatively correlated (Okun's law), aggregate-demand shocks must be a major source of business cycles. Since monetary policy controls aggregate demand, it is able to stabilize business cycles well.

## Optimal government spending over the business cycle

This section studies optimal public expenditure over the business cycle. It shows that that optimal public expenditure deviates from the Samuelson rule to reduce, but not eliminate, the unemployment gap. The amplitude of the deviation depends on the unemployment gap, fiscal multiplier, and elasticity of substitution between public and private goods. Since the unemployment gap is countercyclical, optimal public expenditure is also countercyclical. That is, the government should spend more in bad times and less in good times. The section also shows that in our model of slack, fiscal multipliers depend on the prevailing amount of slack, and are therefore cyclical.