---
title: "LaTeX Bibliography Style File" 
date: 2022-11-08
url: /d4/
author: "Pascal Michaillat"
description: "This style file formats academic bibliographies stored in BibTeX files and produced by LaTeX documents." 
summary: "This style file formats academic bibliographies stored in BibTeX files and produced by LaTeX documents." 
cover:
    image: "/d4.png"
    alt: "Bibiography produced with style file"
    relative: false
editPost:
    URL: "https://github.com/pmichaillat/latex-bibliography"
    Text: "GitHub repository"
# disableAnchoredHeadings: false
 
---

## Download

- [bibliography.bst](/bibliography.bst) -- Style file to format academic bibliographies produced by LateX documents. Must be included in the same folder as the LaTeX document. The bibliography must be stored in a BibTex document (`.bib` format).
- [bibliography.pdf](/bibliography.pdf) -- Bibliography produced from the style file. This file is not required to use the style file; it only illustrate the output of the style file. 

## How to use

- Add `bibliography.bst` to the folder with your LaTeX files
- Insert `\bibliographystyle{bibliography}` in the preamble of your document to call `bibliography.bst`
- Insert `\usepackage{natbib}` in the preamble of your document to call the `natbib.sty` package, which is used to cite references and produce the bibliography (this package is part of standard LaTeX distributions)
- Insert `\bibliography{bibliography}` at the end of the document to produce the bibliography. All the references cited in the text must be in a BibTex file `bibliography.bib`. The BibTeX file must be in the same folder as the other LaTeX files.

## Example

The bibliography `bibliography.pdf` was produced with the style file.

## Reference

As much as possible the style file follows the guidelines from the [Chicago Manual of Style](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/home.html). The style file is based on the style file `econ.bst`, which was created by [Shiro Takeda](https://shirotakeda.github.io) and is [available on GitHub](https://github.com/ShiroTakeda/econ-bst).
